The directory contains three folders:

src
tools
Examples

src contains the source code of mdan program.
tools contains several tools to pre- and post-process data of mdan.
Examples contains the 100@1NP example, only a short trajctory segment of 1 ns.

src

This folder contains the source code (mdan) to read a trajectory of atoms (number of atoms, ortorhombic cell sides (Lx, Ly, Lz), and coordinates) as a function of time) to compute the S and F diffusion matrices of beads representing friction points.

Compilation on Leonardo is possible with Portland group compilers and GPU directives, even if there are so far only a few GPU regions in the 2-nd order calculations.

> cd src
> module purge
> module load nvhpc/24.5
> make

The executable is installed in BASEDIR/bin (see Makefile), called "mdan_gpu.npbc".
This version does not use periodic boundary conditions (PBC), so be careful to use whole molecules, not broken by the simulation cell.
The nvt-14_whole.xtc trajectory produced by Gromacs was rebuilt to remove bond breaking by PBC.

tools 

xtc

A simple code to convert xtc trajectories simulated with Gromacs into a plain binary format that the above mdan code can read.
The plain binary format is easily chopped into segments to compute S and F matrices in parallel runs of mdan.
See README in xtc directory and in Examples directory.
This step will be removed in future applications.

viscosity 

A set of simple Fortran codes: 
to average S/F matrices and array of projections obtained working with mdan on independent trajectory segments (many_files.f90);
to solve Eq. XXX (SC=FC lambda) and to obtain relaxation modes and rates (solveFS.f90);
to apply Eq. XXX (acf.f90). 

See Examples below for details.

Examples 

Convert 1-ns long trajectory of 100@1NP Gromacs trajectory (nvT-14_whole.xtc) 
to a plain binary format (last.bin):

> ${BINDIR}/bin2xtc nvT-14_whole.xtc last.bin -1 1000 0 1

Then the plain binary format can be chopped into pieces of equal length:

> ls -l last.bin

Let us chop the trajectory into two segments.
Compute half of the total size 7273616 in bytes, 3636808.
Then:

> split --bytes=3636808 --numeric-suffix --suffix-length=2 last.bin

Move each segment into a separated trajectory, with the same name:

> mv x00 1/last.bin
> mv x01 2/last.bin

The time-series of the virial computed by Gromacs (virial.xvg) must be chopped accordingly to coordinates:

> split --lines=50 --numeric-suffix --suffix-length=2 virial.xvg 
> mv x00 1/virial.xvg
> mv x01 2/virial.xvg

Now it is possible to compute S and F matrices for each segment in parallel jobs.
The mdan code reads the time-series of coordinates (last.bin) and virial (virial.xvg) and computes S/F matrix elements and the projections of virial onto the basis functions chosen in input.
Notice that mdan requires a PDB-format file (actually not exactly e PDB) with basic description of the molecule in terms of friction points (beads).
See cg.pdb in Examples/100@1NP directory.
For application of diffusion theory this information is marginally used, but it is important to assign friction and to describe the bonds used as 1st-rank 1st-order basis-functions.

The calculation is in two steps.
The first step (first_order.in) is the calculation of 1st-rank 1st-order relaxation modes:

> $BASEDIR/bin/mdan_gpu.npbc < first_order.in > out

Different directories (1,2,...) can be run in parallel.
Projections of the virial is not calculated at this stage.
The output of the calculation is called fs.dump in each of the directories.
This is a binary file that contains as double-precision floating points the matrix elements of the upper triangle of F and S matrices.
This file must be filled in each of the trajectory segments, 1 and 2 in the example.
The whole S and F matrices (the lower-triangle) are built when read by the other tools.
Ths 1st-rank 1st-order matrices are used to obtain, by solving CF=SC lambda, the 1st-rank 1st-order relaxation modes.
Before the solution, the S and F matrix elements must be averaged using all the trajectory segments available.
In the example they are 2, contained in directories 1 and 2.

In the directory containing the segments:

> $BINDIR/many_files 5900 0 fs.dump proj.dump 1 2 1

First argument is the number of 1st-order basis functions, in this case the number of bonds (see first_order.in).
Second argument is the number of second-order basis functons, in this case zero.
Third and fourth arguments are the names, in each directory, of S/F matrix elements (fs.dump) and projections of virial onto basis functions (proj.bin, not generated by 1st-order calculation).
Next arguments are the first directory to read, the total number of directories and the number of directories to skip.

The average is then fs.dump in the directory above each segment.
To preserve the 1st-rank 1st-order S/F matrices, it is important to save average fs.dump into, for instance, fs_1.dump.
Now it is possible to solve FC = SC lambda by using solveSF applied to fs_1.dump:

> module purge
> module load profile/base
> module load openblas/0.3.24--gcc--12.2.0
> module load openmpi/4.1.6--gcc--12.2.0
> module load netlib-scalapack/2.2.0--openmpi--4.1.6--gcc--12.2.0
> $BINDIR/solveSF -n1 5900 -n2 0 -f fs_1.dump -o1 eval.out -o2 evec_m1.dump

or, to use a queue:

> sbatch ./solveSF.sh

-n1 indicates the number of basis functions for 1st-order.
This is (see fist_order.in) the number of bonds in the chains.
-n2 indicates the 2nd-order functions, zero so far.
-f is the input file containing (as binary double-precision floating numbers) F and S matrices.
-o1 will contain the eigenvalues.
-o2 the eigenvectors.

The 2nd-order applications of mdan code will read the eigenvectors in a file "evec_m1.dump" in
the directory above the one used in the application.
The 1st-rank 1st-order eigenvectors will be used according to the basis functions indicated in the mdan input file (second_order.in).
Notice that the basis functions are the same, as they must be, in first_order.in and second_order.in files.

> $BASEDIR/bin/mdan_gpu.npbc < second_order.in > out

The averaging and diagonalization procedures can be repeated, provided the command-line parameters be changed according to differences between 1st-rank/1st-order and 2nd-rank/2nd-order.
On more difference is that now also the projections of virial onto basis functions is produced (proj.bin in each directory).
Therefore the averaging will be performed also for these array elements.

Once eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the 2nd-rank 2nd-order problem and the projections of virial onto 2nd-rank 2nd-order basis functions are computed, the correlation function relevant to viscosity is known.
The processing of these quantities (Eq. XXX) is performed by the acf tool (tools directory):

$BASEDIR/bin/acf -n 55 -i1 eval.out -i2 evec.out -i3 proj.dump -o A_rates.out

-n indicates the number of relaxation modes, no matter of the expansion order of the basis-set.
 This provided eval.out (-i1), evec.out (-i2) and projections (-i3) are written accordingly.
-o indicates the file that will contain amplitudes A and relaxation rates (see Eq. XXX).

The output file is a simple table that can be analyzed with any graphical package to produce eta(omega) (Eq. XXX).
One example is given in R language (eta.R):
it can be easily changed to combine in the same eta function different amplitudes/rates files with given weights (Eq. XXX).
